---
layout: default
title: Legal Challenges
---

# Legal Challenges

## Relevant Legal Rights

### The Fourth Amendment: Unreasonable Search and Seizure

The Fourth Amendment states:

> [The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized.](https://www.law.cornell.edu/constitution/fourth_amendment)

#### Terry v. Ohio

**Background** - [A veteran Cleveland detective (McFadden), observed two strangers (Terry, the petitioner, and Chilton) on a street corner walking back and forth on an identical route, staring at the same store front. The detective believed the men may have been preparing to rob the store and approached them, asking for their names. McFadden spun Terry around and patted down his outside clothing, finding a pistol. He also patted down Chilton and another man standing with the two men, and discovered a weapon on Chilton. Terry and Chilton were charged with carrying concealed weapons. The defense moved to suppress the weapons. Though the trial court rejected the prosecution theory that the guns had been seized during a search incident to a lawful arrest, the court denied the motion to suppress and admitted the weapons into evidence on the ground that the officer had cause to believe that petitioner and Chilton were acting suspiciously, that their interrogation was warranted, and that the officer, for his own protection, had the right to pat down their outer clothing having reasonable cause to believe that they might be armed. The court distinguished between an investigatory "stop" and an arrest, and between a "frisk" of the outer clothing for weapons and a full-blown search for evidence of crime. Petitioner and Chilton were found guilty, an intermediate appellate court affirmed, and the State Supreme Court dismissed the appeal on the ground that "no substantial constitutional question" was involved.](/sources#392US1)

**Outcome** - [the Supreme Court found that reasonable, articulable suspicion was sufficient grounds for a police officer to briefly stop and question a citizen. Such suspicion must not be based on the officer’s “inchoate and unparticularized suspicion or ‘hunch,’ but on the specific reasonable inferences which he is entitled to draw from the facts in light of his experience.” Terry employed a “totality of circumstances” test to determine the reasonableness of police investigatory stops.](/sources#RPLCI)

**United States v. Brignoni-Ponce** - [addressed the issue of race as a factor giving rise to reasonable suspicion of criminal activity. “In this case the officers relied on a single factor to justify stopping respondent’s car: the apparent Mexican ancestry of the occupants.” Neither this single factor nor the police officer’s belief that the occupants were illegal aliens satisfied the constitutional minimum for an investigatory stop. The Court conceded “[t]he likelihood that any given person of Mexican ancestry is an alien is high enough to make Mexican appearance a relevant factor.” By itself, however, that factor did not support reasonable suspicion necessary for a roving stop. The Court proposed a multi-factored analysis: “Officers may consider the characteristics of the area ... ; usual patterns of traffic on the particular road, and previous experience with alien traffic.” Additionally, erratic behavior and evasive acts by those under the observation of the police officer, as well as aspects of the motor vehicle, may support the reasonable suspicion necessary for an investigatory stop.](/sources#RPLCI)

**United States v. Martin-Fuerte** - [Subsequent courts, however, have upheld stops of persons that were partially based on race. Border patrol agents in United States v. Martin-Fuerte referred motorists selectively to a secondary inspection area on the basis of several factors, including Mexican ancestry. Of 820 vehicles referred for secondary inspection over the period in question, roughly 20% included illegal aliens. On this basis, the Court determined that “to the extent that the Border Patrol relies on apparent Mexican ancestry at this checkpoint, ... that reliance clearly is relevant to the law enforcement need to be served.” Indeed, according to the majority, “even if it be assumed that such referrals are made largely on the basis of apparent Mexican ancestry, we perceive no constitutional problem.” But the Court cautioned against extending the logic of border enforcement cases to situations remote from the border, where the government interest in immigration policing may be less compelling. Thus, a different conclusion might pertain “if, for example, reliance were put on apparent Mexican ancestry at a checkpoint operated near the Canadian border.”](/sources#RPLCI)

**United States v. Weaver** - [affirmed the conviction of a black drug courier suspect who was stopped at the Kansas City Airport based, in part, on information that “a number of young roughly dressed black males from street gangs in Los Angeles frequently brought cocaine into the Kansas City area.” The court ruled that federal drug enforcement agents can rely on racial characteristics if objective crime trend analysis validates use of these characteristics as “risk factors” in predicting criminal behavior.](/sources#RPLCI)

**United States v. Montero-Camargo** - [The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, however, has determined that it is impermissible to take Hispanic origin into account in stops in Southern California. In United States v. Montero-Camargo, the appeals court noted both significant “demographic changes” and “changes in the law restricting the use of race as a criterion in government decision-making” as reasons for precluding any consideration of race. The likelihood that in an area in which the majority—or even a substantial part—of the population is Hispanic, any given person of Hispanic ancestry is in fact an alien, let alone an illegal alien, is not high enough to make Hispanic appearance a relevant factor in the reasonable suspicion calculus.... [F]actors that have such a low probative value that no reasonable officer would have relied on them to make an investigative stop must be disregarded as a matter of law. The Supreme Court’s contrary dicta in Brignoni-Ponce that ethnic appearance could be relevant was distinguished as relying “on now-outdated demographic information.”](/sources#RPLCI)

**Whren v. United States** - [A frequently criticized form of racial profiling involves the “pretextual” traffic stop—that is, detaining minority group members for routine traffic violations in order to conduct a more generalized criminal investigation. The Court directly addressed the constitutionality of the practice in 1996. Defendants in Whren v. United States were two motorists who were charged with drug offenses based on evidence discovered after they were pulled over for pausing at a stop sign for an unusually long time, turning without signaling, and taking off at an unreasonable speed. The Whren Court held that the Fourth Amendment is not violated when a minor traffic infraction is a pretext rather than the actual motivation for a stop by law enforcement officers. In other words, the fact that suspects were stopped for pretextual reasons did not, without more, constitutionally taint the police action or evidence of drug crimes discovered as a consequence. Whren, however, did not hold that the officers’ motivation is entirely irrelevant when probable cause for a stop is based on a traffic violation. As explained by the Court, “[t]he Constitution prohibits selective enforcement of the law based on considerations such as race. But the constitutional basis for objecting to intentionally discriminatory application of laws is the Equal Protection Clause, not the Fourth Amendment. Subjective intentions play no role in ordinary, probable-cause Fourth Amendment analysis.”](/sources#RPLCI)

**Atwater v. City of Lago Vista** - [the Court appeared to reinforce Whren by ruling that the Fourth Amendment did not prohibit the warrantless arrest and custodial detention of a motorist for misdemeanor traffic offenses, including failure to wear a seatbelt, punishable only by a fine. Citing the “recent debate over racial profiling,” Justice O’Connor dissented, arguing for a Fourth Amendment principle that would require “officers’ poststop action” in such cases to be reasonable and “proportional” to the offense committed.](/sources#RPLCI)
